---
layout: post
title:  "This Month's Read III: Electric-magnetic duality"
date:   2025-04-14
categories: post
publish: true
ongoing: true
home: true

ids:
    - Overview
    - Electromagnetism
    - Quantum Mechanics
    - Aharonov Effects
    - Electromagnetic Duality
    - Extras
    - References
    - Footnotes

defs:
    - Lorentz force 
    - Maxwells fquations
    - Conservative force
    - Potential
    - Euler-Lagrange operator
    - Variational derivative
    - Minimal coupling
    - Covariant derivative
---

Last "This month's read" post was about probability theory. This month's post will cover something completely different: electromagnetism (and some generalizations). Although we have experimentally discovered only electric charges (magnetic fields are generated by moving or 'spinning' electric charges), the laws of electromagnetism exhibit a variety of beautiful symmetries and duality relations when we introduce magnetic charges as well! 

<hr id = "Overview">
<div class = "nav-block"><div class = "side">Overview</div></div>

This post is structured as follows:
* Intro to electromagnetism
* Quantizing electromagnetism
* Aharonov effects (with Bohm and Casher)
* Montonon&ndash;Olive duality

<hr id = "Electromagnetism">
<div class = "nav-block"><div class = "side">Electromagnetism</div></div>

Classical electromagnetism is entirely characterized by <b id = "Maxwellsequations">Maxwell's equations</b>[^1] $\newcommand{\vector}[1]{\vec{\mathbf{#1}}}$

<div style = "text-align: center">
    <div style = "display: inline-block; margin-right: 10%">
        \begin{align}
            \nabla\cdot\vector{E} &= \rho\,,\\
            \nabla\times\vector{B} &= \frac{\partial\vector{E}}{\partial t}+\vector{J}\,.\label{maxwell}
        \end{align}
    </div>
    <div style = "display: inline-block">
        \begin{align}
            \nabla\cdot\vector{B} &= 0\,,\label{B_gauss}\\
            \nabla\times\vector{E} &= -\frac{\partial\vector{B}}{\partial t}\,,\label{faraday}
        \end{align}
    </div>
</div>

together with the <b id = "Lorentzforce">Lorentz force</b>
\begin{gather}
    \vector{F} = q(\vector{E}+\vector{v}\times\vector{B})\,.
\end{gather}
In these equations, $\vector{E}$ and $\vector{B}$ denote the electric and magnetic fields, respectively, $q$ denotes the charge and $\vector{J}$ denotes the electric current. Note that we work in natural units where both $c=1=\varepsilon_0$.<br><br>

[^1]: Sometimes also called the <b>Maxwell&ndash;Heaviside equations</b> because it was Heaviside who put them in this more elegant form!

<div class = "note">
    <div class = "side">Note</div>
    Taking the divergence of Maxwell's law \eqref{maxwell} gives the continuity equation:
    
    $$
        \frac{\partial\rho}{\partial t}+\nabla\cdot\vector{J}=0\,.
    $$

    This was one of the motivating reasons for Maxwell to derive his equations!
</div>

To better understand the theory of electromagnetism and eventually quantize it, we first have to unearth its symmetries a bit better, in particular its 'gauge structure'. This structure is related to certain redundancies in the definition of the electric and magnetic fields.<br><br>

First, start with Gauss's law \eqref{B_gauss} for the magnetic field. This equation, through the <a href = "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Helmholtz_decomposition" target = "_blank" rel = "noopener">Helmholtz decomposition</a>, shows that

\begin{gather}
    \vector{B} = \nabla\times\vector{A}
\end{gather}

for some vector potential $\vector{A}:\mathbb{R}^3\rightarrow\mathbb{R}^3$. Inserting this in Faraday's law \eqref{faraday} then gives

\begin{gather}
    \label{electric_potential}
    \vector{E} = -\nabla\varphi - \frac{\partial\vector{A}}{\partial t}
\end{gather}

for some smooth function $\varphi:\mathbb{R}^3\rightarrow\mathbb{R}$. Now, due to the properties of the $\nabla$-operator, the choice of potentials $(\varphi,\vector{A})$ is not unique. For every smooth function $\chi:\mathbb{R}^3\rightarrow\mathbb{R}$, we can perform the simultaneous transformations

$$
    \varphi\longrightarrow\varphi-\frac{\partial\chi}{\partial t} \qquad\text{and}\qquad \vector{A}\longrightarrow\vector{A}+\nabla\chi
$$

without actually altering the electric and magnetic fields. This freedom will be essential once we consider quantum effects! However, for the moment, let us just consider the electromagnetic potentials without paying too much attention to this freedom.<br><br>

In classical mechanics, most forces that we encounter are of a specific kind: they are <b id = "Conservativeforce">conservative</b>. Just like the electric field, this means that they can be derived from a <b id = "Potential">potential</b>:

$$
    \vector{F} = -\nabla V
$$

for a smooth function $V:\mathbb{R}^3\rightarrow\mathbb{R}$. We could now wonder whether the Lorentz force is also of this type. There is, however, immediately an issue. Conservative forces only depend on the position $\vector{r}$, while the Lorentz force depends on the velocity $\vector{v}\equiv\dot{\vector{r}}$ as well! Luckily, there is a beautiful solution. We can generalize the notion of conservative forces to more general settings involving higher-order derivatives of the position (so even beyond the velocity). To this end, we need to say goodbye to the Newtonian realm and let the Lagrangian formulation enter the stage.<br><br>

Newton's second law

$$
    \vector{F} = \frac{d\vector{p}}{dt}
$$

is equivalent to the following set of equations, called the <b>Euler&ndash;Lagrange equations</b>,

$$
    \frac{\partial L}{\partial q^i} = \frac{d}{dt}\frac{\partial L}{\partial\dot{q}^i}\,,
$$

where $L:=T-V$ is the <b id = "Lagrangian">Lagrangian</b> (function), the difference between the kinetic energy and the potential energy, and the $q^i$ are the 'generalized coordinates' (these are just our preferred coordinates in which to solve the dynamics of the system). In a slightly less common form, they read

$$
    \frac{\partial T}{\partial q^i} - \frac{d}{dt}\frac{\partial T}{\partial\dot{q}^i} = Q_i\,,
$$

with

$$
    Q_i := \vector{F}\cdot\frac{\partial\vector{r}}{\partial q^i}
$$

the <b>generalized forces</b> (note that if we in ordinary coordinates, i.e. $\vector{q}=\vector{r}$, then $\vector{Q}=\vector{F}$). The operator

$$
    \delta_{\text{EL}} := \sum_{i=1}^k\left(\frac{\partial}{\partial q^i}-\frac{d}{dt}\frac{\partial}{\partial\dot{q}^i}\right)\delta q^i
$$

is also called the <b id = "Euler-Lagrangeoperator">Euler&ndash;Lagrange operator</b> or <b id = "Variationalderivative">variational derivative</b>. It follows that any generalized force of the form

$$
    Q = \delta_{\text{EL}}U
$$

for a generalized potential $U\equiv U(\vector{r},\vector{v},t)$ will lead to valid Euler&ndash;Lagrange equations. The fun part is now to check that the Lorentz force is exactly of this form, with

$$
    U(\vector{r},\vector{v},t) = q\bigl(V(\vector{r},t) - \vector{v}\cdot\vector{A}(\vector{r},t)\bigr)\,.
$$

(This will be left as an exercise to the reader &#x1F609;.) Now, to go from the Lagrangian framework to the Hamiltonian framework, which is preferred for quantum mechanics, one needs to derive <b>(conjugate or canonical) momenta</b> from the Lagrangian:

$$
    p_i := \frac{\partial L}{\partial\dot{q}^i}\,.
$$

For ordinary potentials, the only contribution comes from the kinetic energy and we would obtain the classical relation

$$
    \vector{p} = m\vector{v}\,.
$$

However, since the Lorentz potential is velocity dependent, an additional term is obtained:

$$
    p_i = m\dot{q}^i + qA_i\,.
$$

It follows that the canonical momenta are not equal to the kinetic momenta!

<div class = "note">
    <div class = "side">Note</div>
    It is the canonical momentum that is fundamentally preserved, not the kinetic momentum!
</div>

<hr id = "QuantumMechanics">
<div class = "nav-block"><div class = "side">Quantum mechanics</div></div>

In quantum mechanics, the fundamental equation is Schrödinger's equation (where we again use natural units with $\hbar=1$):

$$
    i\hbar\frac{\partial}{\partial t}\psi = \widehat{H}\psi\,,
$$

with $\widehat{H}$ the Hamiltonian operator. In the vacuum, for free particles, this Hamiltonian only consists of a kinetic term:

$$
    \widehat{H}_{\text{free}} := \frac{\widehat{p}^2}{2m}\,.
$$

Now, a charged particle in an electric field has a potential energy equal to $V=q\varphi$, where $\varphi:\mathbb{R}^3\rightarrow\mathbb{R}$ is the scalar potential from Eq. \eqref{electric_potential}. The question becomes what to do with the vector potential? Does it also play a role? Well, as noted above, the canonical momenta obtain a contribution proportional to $\vector{A}$. So, to retrieve the kinetic momenta, we simply have to subtract this contribution:

$$
    \widehat{H}_{\text{EM}} = \frac{(\widehat{p}-q\vector{A})^2}{2m}+q\varphi\,.
$$

This substitution $\widehat{p}\longrightarrow\widehat{p}-q\vector{A}$ is called <b id = "Minimalcoupling">minimal coupling</b>. Under (canonical) quantization, the canonical momentum $\widehat{p}_i$ is replaced with the differential operator $-i\partial_i$. By analogy, when incorporating an interaction such as electromagnetism, one introduces the <b id = "Covariantderivative">covariant derivative</b>:

$$
    \nabla_i := \partial_i - iqA_i\,.
$$

This way, the electromagnetically coupled Schrödinger equation becomes

$$
    i\frac{\partial}{\partial t}\psi = \left(-\frac{\nabla^2}{2m}+q\varphi\right)\psi\,.
$$

In fact, if one works entirely in terms of 4-vectors $x^\mu,p^\mu$, etc., the electromagnetically coupled Schrödinger equation is simply the free one written in 'covariant' form. To this end, define the 4-momentum and electromagnetic 4-potential as follows:

$$
    p^\mu\equiv(E,\widehat{p}) \qquad\text{and}\qquad A^\mu\equiv(\phi,\vector{A})\,.
$$

The 4-dimensional covariant derivative can now be defined to include a temporal component:

\begin{gather}
    \label{covariant_derivative}
    \nabla_\mu := \partial_\mu + iqA_\mu\,,
\end{gather}

where indices are raised and lowered with the (mostly-minus[^2]) Minkowski metric $\eta\equiv\mathrm{diag}(+1,-1,-1,-1)$:

$$
    (\xi_0,\xi_1,\xi_2,\xi_3)\equiv(\xi^0,-\xi^1,-\xi^2,-\xi^3)\,.
$$

[^2]: Two (equivalent) conventions exist: mostly-pluses and mostly-minus. The former is mainly used by particle physicists, whereas the latter is mainly used in (general) relativity.

With these conventions, we can see that the 'covariant' Schrödinger equation

$$
    -i\nabla_t\psi = -\frac{\nabla^2}{2m}\psi
$$

captures both the free-particle case when $\nabla_\mu=\partial_\mu$ and the electromagnetic case when Eq. \eqref{covariant_derivative} holds!

<div class = "note">
    <div class = "side">Note</div>
    The reason why 'covariant' has been put in between quotation marks twice now is that this equation is actually not what one would really call covariant. To be entirely covariant, i.e. invarant under general coordinate transformations, 4-vectors (and operators) should always occur as a whole. For example, in the Schrödinger equation, the temporal component occurs linearly on the left-hand side, whereas the spatial component quadratically on the right-hand side. This is not truly covariant!
</div>

<hr id = "AharonovEffects">
<div class = "nav-block"><div class = "side">Potential coupling</div></div>

<p style = "height: 200pt;color: orange;vertical-align: middle;display: table-cell">Here, the Aharonov&ndash;Bohm and Aharonov&ndash;Casher will be discussed in the future</p>

<hr id = "ElectromagneticDuality">
<div class = "nav-block"><div class = "side">Montonen&ndash;Olive duality</div></div>

<p style = "height: 200pt;color: orange;vertical-align: middle;display: table-cell">Here, general electric-magnetic duality (Montonen&ndash;Olive duality) will be discussed in the future.</p>

<!--<hr id = "Extras">
<div class = "nav-block"><div class = "side">Extras</div></div>-->

<hr id = "References">
<div class = "nav-block"><div class = "side">References</div></div>

* J. M. Figueroa-O'Farrill (1998). <i>Electromagnetic duality for children</i>. <a href = "https://www.maths.ed.ac.uk/~jmf/Teaching/Lectures/EDC.pdf" target = "_blank" rel = "noopener">https://www.maths.ed.ac.uk/~jmf/Teaching/Lectures/EDC.pdf</a>.

<p style = "height: 200pt;color: orange;vertical-align: middle;display: table-cell">
* ?. ??? (???). <i>???</i>. ???.
</p>

<hr id = "Footnotes">
<div class = "nav-block"><div class = "side">Footnotes</div></div>