---
layout: post
title:  "This Month's Read II: Quantum logic"
date:   2025-01-19
categories: post
publish: true
ongoing: true
home: true

ids:
    - Overview
    - Quantum Primer
    - Quantum Logic
    - Sequent Calculus
    - Linear Logic
    - Categorical Semantics
    - Extras
    - References
    - Footnotes

defs:
    - Truth
    - Falsity
    - de Morgans Laws
---

Last month's post was about probability theory. This month's post will cover something completely different. Most people have heard about quantum mechanics and its implications for technology (in the form of quantum computing). What is less well known is the logical structure of the propositions that can be considered in quantum mechanics. 'Quantum logic', which is the type of logic that should come out of this consideration, has been studied since the days that quantum mechanics was formalized. However, pay attention to the word 'should' in the previous sentence. It turns out that the naive logic that one would extract is actually quite ill behaved. 

<hr id = "Overview">
<div class = "nav-block"><div class = "side">Overview</div></div>

This post is structured as follows:
* Primer on quantum information theory
* Birkhoff&ndash;Von Neumann logic
* Primer on sequent calculus
* Linear logic
* Categorical semantics

<hr id = "QuantumPrimer">
<div class = "nav-block"><div class = "side">Primer on quantum information theory</div></div>

In quantum mechanics, everything revolves around state vectors $\lvert\psi\rangle$ in Hilbert spaces $\mathcal{H}$ and the operators $\widehat{O}\in\mathrm{End}(\mathcal{H})$ that act on them. An important construction in quantum mechanics and quantum information theory is the tensor product, which assembles separate quantum systems into one composite system:

$$\mathcal{H}_1,\mathcal{H}_2,\cdots,\mathcal{H}_n\longrightarrow\mathcal{H}_1\otimes\mathcal{H}_2\otimes\cdots\otimes\mathcal{H}_n\,.$$

Associated to this construction and the unitarity of quantum mechanical evolution (the Schrödinger equation), there are two very important theorems: the no-cloning and no-deleting theorems.

<div class="theorem" text="No-cloning" markdown = "1">
  Consider a Hilbert space $\mathcal{H}$. There exists no unitary operator $\widehat{U}\in\mathrm{Aut}(\mathcal{H}\otimes\mathcal{H})$ such that

  $$\widehat{U}\bigl(\lvert\phi\rangle\lvert\psi\rangle\bigr) = e^{i\alpha(\phi,\psi)}\lvert\phi\rangle\lvert\phi\rangle$$

  for any two (normalized) states $\lvert\phi\rangle,\lvert\psi\rangle\in\mathcal{H}$.[^1]

  [^1]: The phase factor $e^{i\alpha(\phi,\psi)}$ is a consequence of the <a href = "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Projective_Hilbert_space" target = "_blank" rel = "noopener">projective nature</a> of quantum mechanics.
</div>

<div class="theorem" text="No-deleting">
  Consider two Hilbert spaces $\mathcal{H},\mathcal{H}'$, where the latter can be interpreted as representing the 'machine'. If a unitary operator $\widehat{U}\in\mathrm{Aut}(\mathcal{H}\otimes\mathcal{H}\otimes\mathcal{H}')$ satisfies

  $$\widehat{U}\bigl(\lvert\psi\rangle\lvert\psi\rangle\lvert A\rvert\bigr) = \lvert\psi\rangle\lvert0\rangle\lvert A_\psi\rangle$$

  for all initial states $\lvert\psi\rangle\in\mathcal{H}$ and initial ancilla states $\lvert A\rangle\in\mathcal{H}'$, then the operation $\lvert A\rangle\mapsto\lvert A_\psi\rangle$ on the ancilla space is an isometric embedding, i.e. the second physical state can only be deleted, if the information is stored in the ancilla state. 
</div>

?? FINISH ??

<hr id = "QuantumLogic">
<div class = "nav-block"><div class = "side">Birkhoff&ndash;Von Neumann logic</div></div>

  In classical logic, the set of propositions forms a <a href = "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Boolean_algebra_(structure)" target = "_blank" rel = "noopener">Boolean algebra</a>. This means that one has a conjunction and disjunction (the logical 'and' $\land$ and 'or' $\lor$), a negation or complement ($\lnot$) and two constants ($\top$, $\bot$), representing <b id = "Truth">truth</b> and <b id = "Falsity">falsity</b>. These constants and operations satisfy a number of conditions such as distributivity (or, in logic, <b id = "deMorgansLaws">de Morgan's laws</b>):

  $$p\land (q\lor r) = (p\land q)\lor(p\land r) \qquad\qquad p\lor (q\land r) = (p\lor q)\land(p\lor r)\,.$$

  All these propositions (and the associated Boolean structure) can be represented using sets, namely the set $S_p$ representing the proposition $p$ is given by all elements that satisfy $p$. In quantum mechanics, one does not simply work with sets, but with subspaces, since, by the projection axiom of quantum mechanics, performing a measurement projects the state vector onto the subspace associated to the obtained eigenvalue.<br><br>

  Now, following Birkhoff and Von Neumann, if one considers the $\\{0,1\\}$-valued measurements as propositions in quantum theory, one finds that propositions are represented by projection operators, i.e. $\Pi^2=\Pi$. It can be shown that the set of projection operators or, equivalently, closed subspaces of Hilbert spaces forms a generalization of a Boolean algebra: an orthomodular lattice. However, because these lattices are nondistributive, it is hard to introduce a notion of implication or deduction and, as such, this gives rise to a very 'non-logic' theory. Moreover, there is no clear way to pass from this propositional form to a predicative form. A third issue, related to the probabilistic predictions of quantum mechanics through the <a href = "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Born_rule" target = "_blank" rel = "noopener">Born rule</a>, is that although the crisp statements about the value of a measurement cannot be made, the orthomodular lattice of quantum propositions does satisfy the law of the excluded middle.<br><br>

  To circumvent these issues, one needs a different, more general, type of logic!

<hr id = "SequentCalculus">
<div class = "nav-block"><div class = "side">Primer on sequent calculus</div></div>

<p style = "height: 200pt"></p>

<hr id = "LinearLogic">
<div class = "nav-block"><div class = "side">Linear logic</div></div>

<p style = "height: 200pt"></p>

<hr id = "CategoricalSemantics">
<div class = "nav-block"><div class = "side">Categorical semantics</div></div>

<p style = "height: 200pt"></p>

<!--<hr id = "Extras">
<div class = "nav-block"><div class = "side">Extras</div></div>-->



<hr id = "References">
<div class = "nav-block"><div class = "side">References</div></div>

* Wilce, Alexander (2002). <i>Quantum Logic and Probability Theory</i>. The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. <a href = "https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/qt-quantlog/" target = "_blank" ref = "noopener">https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/qt-quantlog/</a>
* $n$Lab (2025). <i>Quantum Logic</i>. <a href = "https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/quantum+logic" target = "_blank" ref = "noopener">https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/quantum+logic</a>

<hr id = "Footnotes">
<div class = "nav-block"><div class = "side">Footnotes</div></div>